---
templateKey: blog-post
title: 'January 2020: Mindfulness'
date: 2020-01-31T23:14:28.068Z
description: My first monthly post of 2020
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/jan-2020.png
---
Last week, a friend of mine invited me to write something every month in 2020 -- this my first post.

## The Last Few Years

Three years ago I realized that I was missing out. I didn't read for fun. I didn't watch movies, or shows. I played hardly any games. I don't know why it took me so long but it wasn't until my 2017 resolution to seek out those new experiences that I realized, all at once, there were worlds and worlds of great experiences I had just been dismissing. Worlds and worlds and I would spend my free time coding and watching Game Grumps. Those first months were like a renaissance. The school week was hard -- the hardest it had ever been, actually -- but it made those weekend escapes at my parents' all the more incredible. It was pure joy for a great while.

A year and a half ago I graduated from college and my doctor stopped prescribing my ADD medication. Which was fine because I wanted to try living without it anyway. My parents and I moved. I jumped between a couple of jobs. By 2019 I was different and had stepped into a different life set up with a great job, but also rumbling with vague anxieties, plagued with scattered and racing thoughts, and drained with unshakable insomnia. The whole year was a great laboring effort to piece together a puzzle and the pieces didn't fit. It was a struggle to even just relax, let alone feel much joy in the brief and desperate flashes of time between work, sleep, and an 80-minute commute.

<div style="float:right; width: 480px; border: solid 3px; padding: 4px; text-align: justify; margin: 4px">
<iframe width="472" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/kzf_56K-fwc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe><br />
This was one of my favorites during my Michigan trip
</div>

In December I got my fursuit and [went to MFF](https://twitter.com/Ghimno/status/1204106484096913408), which I had been anticipating for a long time and I'm sure I'll talk about at some point. But I also went to Michigan to visit with family for Christmas and take chilly walks outside listening to Sufjan Stevens, and when I returned I was different again.

If 2019 was me tumbling over and getting back up for twelve months, I'm confident (or at least hopeful) that 2020 will be me standing, walking, and running again. In this first month I've already bought a house and planned out a trip to visit some new friends in Ohio. I've also just felt a lot better.

I'm not sure what these posts are going to be, or that I'm even going to follow-up on what I've started above, but assuming I keep this up you can at least expect some sort of follow-up on the games I've been playing, movies I've been watching, music I've been listening to, and just whatever other experiences I've been having.

For this first monthly post though, I'm going to share something I wrote back in November last year on mindfulness. If you find yourself identifying in some with what I wrote above, I'd highly recommend doing what I did-- make time for ten minutes of mindfulness meditation and start taking walks with your favorite feel-good music.

## Mindfulness

Earlier this year a co-worker told me that they were practicing mindfulness meditation, an exercise where you sit still, focus on your breathing, and don’t judge yourself if (when, really) you find yourself thinking about other things-- you just calmly bring yourself back to focusing on your breath. The idea is that it trains you to be "present" for the current moment. I had tried it before, but then stopped after my sleep problems took away my motivation to do anything but feel sorry for myself.

When I stopped taking my medication last May I could barely focus enough to write a sentence in my journal, so when I read that mindfulness meditation [showed positive results for ADHD patients](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24374088) I decided to give it another try, ideally every day, but in practice I’ve only had time to do it on weekend mornings, where it matters the most.

Part of what makes the weekends special to me is having the time to idealize my space and myself. In the morning, I do that by making my bed, vacuuming the carpet, putting clothes and dishes away, and opening the window. I take a shower, brush my teeth, and so on to clean myself up. But how do I tidy up the cartoon brain flipping wildly through the pages of a stack of magazines? I look forward to my ten minutes of mindfulness meditation because that’s one of the things it does. For the first two or three minutes, it’s hard even just to get myself to think about my breathing for more than a short moment before being sucked up into another thought, but as time slides by the waves in my mind even out to gentle ripples and leave larger spaces for me just to breathe.

I think we spend a lot of energy trying to recapture what the world felt like as a child, and a lot of resentment and discouragement can come out of the seeming inability to do so. To me, good sleep is one of the missing puzzle pieces in that quest, and mindfulness is another. It was very clear to me the other day at Bed Bath and Beyond.

I walk around a lot of the day by default with a background tape of thoughts, petty anxieties, and general concerns playing, but I also love Christmas. And when I stood in the little Christmas area with the holiday candles and seasonal napkin rings, I had a longing to remember that feeling of Christmas joy. My practice with mindfulness allowed me to push aside the gangly vines covering up the pure, joyful experience lying underneath, if only just for a few moments. Without mindfulness (or special medication) the cyclone of internal mental distractions would have made it impossible; it’s like I have a superpower now, to stop the madness so I can take a breath and feel something real for a second.

Entertainment I think is a word we use to describe a guided rendition of mindfulness, sometimes a more escapist brand of it. But the effect is the same— the idea is that we quiet our inner monologue enough to experience something purely. My relationship with entertainment is important in answering the same operative question that mindfulness does: what does it mean to “spend time wisely.”

In 2017, I figured out that through much of my life, I had been ignoring a lot of entertainment media— movies, TV, books, and games— except for occasional, casual encounters with individual media that grabbed my attention. So I set a New Year’s resolution, partly to “catch up” on media that seemingly everyone else knew about so I could see what the fuss was all about, but mainly to enrich myself with what I imagined were a host of new high-quality experiences that had been lost on me.

For a while, it was great, because pretty much right out the gate I blasted through some top-notch picks. I read all of Lord of the Rings, listened to Disasterpeace’s Hyper Light Drifter soundtrack, played Stardew Valley, and watched one to four movies each weekend, as well as Star Trek: The Next Generation. I remember at times asking myself if doing all that was the wisest use of my time, and I would confidently answer that if it was a fun or at least unique experience, then yes. It was. For a while I knew my answer to be true, but a year later it had become harder to believe myself.

The question became louder and louder until my free time was this impossible stalemate, unable to choose anything to do because nothing would be worthy of my limited free time. A good friend of mine characterized a similar struggle as a search for a “productive” use of time comparable to the fulfillment he gets out work, with things originally meant to be fun turning into an exercise in maximizing productivity. I struggle in the very same way, but I think the root of understanding the problem is that high-octane, burndown-driven work satisfaction is just different from the slower, more thoughtful gratification you’ll get at home.

A couple of weeks ago I suffered from a spike in distracting, work-like dreams that would wake me up at 3AM after which I wouldn’t be able to fall back asleep. The content of the dreams would be different, but the format was always the same: I was faced with an apparently simple problem, but would be powerless to solve it. After some thinking, I believe those dreams were the consequence of a fulfillment problem; work wasn’t fulfilling enough, so my brain was fabricating spare problems to solve to get that extra boost of dopamine I need to feel alright. Of course, being less rested the next day worsened the problem, until one Thursday I nauseously flopped through the workday with my eyes half-closed and slept so hard that night that I woke up in a sweat. Though that may have been the fever I was getting over as well— just maybe.

The solution to my dreaming problems wasn’t to increase my fulfillment at work, but to re-balance my expectations.

Since recovering I’ve started taking a lot of walks and practicing my mindfulness meditation, and especially while I’m out walking I feel very fulfilled. Even though the job has had even less for me to do over the last week, I’ve been sleeping quite well, and it’s because I’ve realigned my expectations for my fulfillment at home. Getting out of the house has played a significant role in that, but I want to say that mindfulness was a part of it too, at least by making it all feel more comfortable and less noisy.

## Recommendations from this Month

### Music

> Listen to all of these on my [January 2020 in Music YouTube Playlist]()

<div style="float:left; width: 480px; border: solid 3px; padding: 4px; text-align: justify; margin: 4px">
<iframe width="472" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OI3Y1DhaYbE" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe><br />
"Let You Go"
</div>

**Bombay Bicycle Club**, on of my favorite bands from college, released their new album _Everything Else Has Gone Wrong_. While I'm still warming up to a few tracks, I'd like to call a few out:

* [_Racing Stripes_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juBPJlGXjnI) -- One of BBC's most candid songs yet. The reed organ accompanying Steadman's aching melody reminds me a bit of a less desperate (but no less earnest) "Motion Picture Soundtrack" by Radiohead. My favorite on the album.
* _Let You Go_
* [_I Can Hardly Speak_](https://youtu.be/TmDPx0qrMlQ)
* [_To The Bone_](https://youtu.be/p4zEfOlid2s) -- Actually a leftover from _So Long See You Tomorrow_ (another incredible album from them), and I didn't even find it this month. But this was the month that it hit me the hardest when it popped up while I was riding the train, in one of those moments that immediately transports me back to what it was like listening to BBC at school.

Other call-outs:

* Dream Pop: [_Party Police_](https://youtu.be/CV7OVcOHJwg) and [_Red Planet_](https://youtu.be/-_v96qs-wYU) by Alvvays -- Though these were technically from December, these are must-listens if you're a fan of melancholy dream pop a la Mazzy Star.
* Yacht Rock: [_Tell Me_](https://youtu.be/m-ZHjAsBzsw) by Pages -- Yacht rock is a crucial component to my weekends, and this hidden gem from 1981 hits the spot dead-on.
* Piano: [_Nadir_](https://youtu.be/ntJ_NB27a1Y) by Gavin Luke -- A fitting addition in the succession of what I would call "sad piano music for sad piano moments" started by [_The Enchantment_ by David Lanz](https://youtu.be/ned7buyAviw) when I was in school, I listened to this one on the 7:30am and 6:40pm trains, when it's so dark outside you can hardly see anything, barreling through the twilight.
* Folk: [_Truly Madly Deeply_](https://youtu.be/4qAzO8FbHn4) by Yoke Lore -- A spectacular take on the Savage Garden classic. I couldn't get enough of it when I first heard it and shamelessly shared it with a handful of my friends on Telegram.
* Classical: [_i carry your heart_](https://youtu.be/YSbc-2SgZTg) by Eric Whitacre

### Movies

* _Annie Hall (1977)_ -- 2.5/5 -- Woody Allen's self-proclaimed "nervous romance" film is inventive and bold, but also packed with so much neurotic wit and observation that I was honestly exhausted by the end of its meandering and relatively pointless 93 minutes.
* _It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963)_ -- 3.5/5 -- A whacky, shouty romp whose humor is mostly lost on me, though it was still an enjoyable time. The version I watched was a little over two and a half hours, though I've heard there's a version that's an hour longer.
* _Incredibles 2 (2018)_ -- 4/5 -- A really well-executed animated action film that left me just about the same way the first one did-- thoroughly entertained, but not really begging for me.
* _The Goonies (1985)_ -- 3/5 -- Another screamy film whose charm was probably a miss for me, but at least the kid cast wasn't as obnoxious as films like Wes Anderson's _Moonrise Kingdom_. The story was undeniably fun, but the dim locales of the film made it feel boxed in. I also thought that Mama Frateli looked like she could have been the lead singer of an all-female AC/DC cover band (which apparently is [already a thing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hell%27s_Belles_(band)))

### Books

I've been reading _The Once and Future King_ by T.H. White, which is actually four stories in one. I'm nearing the end of the first after months of slow going, and and once I finish it I'm probably going to be picking up _The Tombs of Atuan_ by Ursula Le Guin-- the second in the Wizard of Earthsea series.
